Lecture 3: Undirected Graphical Models (#3)
sailinglab/pgm-spring-2019: _posts/2019-01-23-lecture-03.md

---
layout: distill
title: "Lecture 3: Undirected Graphical Models"
description: An introduction to undirected graphical models
date: 2019-01-23

lecturers:
  - name: Eric Xing
    url: "https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~epxing/"

authors:
  - name: Allan Wang
    url: "#"  # optional URL to the author's homepage
  - name: Binghao Deng
    url: "#"
  - name: Weizhao Shao
    url: "#"
  - name: Zhuoran Liu

editors:

>   - name: Lisa Lee

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Lisa Lee
    url: "http://leelisa.com"
```
Feel free to add your github/homepage URLs as well,

abstract: >
---

## Review

> In addition to the **I-map** concept that is introduced in the last lecture, today's lecture also includes **minimal I-map**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the **I-map** concept that was introduced in the last lecture, today's lecture also includes **minimal I-map**.
```

> ### Definition: Minimal I-maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Minimal I-maps
```

> A DAG is a **minimal I-map** if it is an I-map for $$P$$, and if the removal of even a single edge from $$\mathcal{G}$$ renders it not an I-map.

Reviewer: Please define $$P$$ and $$\mathcal{G}$$.

> * A distribution may have several minimal I-maps. Each corresponding to a specific node-ordering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A distribution may have several minimal I-maps, each corresponding to a specific node-ordering.
```

* The fact that $$\mathcal{G}$$ is a minimal I-map for $$P$$ is **far from** a guarantee that $$\mathcal{G}$$ captures the independence structure in $$P$$.

## "Bayes-ball" Algorithm

> "Bayes-ball" algorithm is an algorithm that we can apply to retrieve independences directly from the graphical models. It states that $$X$$ is **d-separated** from $$Z$$ given $$Y$$ if we cannot send a ball from any node in $$X$$ to any node in $$Z$$. "Given" is represented by shading the node in the actual graph. Examples of three basic directed graphical structures are shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Bayes-ball" algorithm is an algorithm that we can apply to retrieve independences directly from a graphical model. We say $$X$$ is **d-separated** from $$Z$$ given $$Y$$ if we cannot send a ball from any node in $$X$$ to any node in $$Z$$. The conditional probability statement ("given $$Y$$") is represented by shading the node in the graph. Examples of three basic directed graphical structures are shown below.
```

> <figure id="basic-structure" class="l-body">

Reviewer: This figure is confusing because (a) and (b) are everywhere. Suggested fixes:
- Remove "(a)" and "(b)" from the image.
- Add column headers: (1) "Observed $$Y$$", (2) "Unobserved $$Y$$"
- Add row headers: "(a)", "(b)", "(c)" for each directed graphical structure, and refer to the row id (a), (b), (c) in the bullet points below.

    <div class="row">
        <div class="col two">
            <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-03/basic.png' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> * From the first and the second structure, we can see that the shaded $$Y$$ node blocks the ball from going between node $$X$$ and $$Z$$, which leads to the independence relations that have been introduced in the last lecture: $$X \perp Z \mid Y$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In (a) and (b), the shaded $$Y$$ node blocks the ball from going between nodes $$X$$ and $$Z$$. This gives the independence relation that was introduced in the last lecture: $$X \perp Z \mid Y$$.
```

> * The third one, the "V-structure", is a special case. Opposite from the first two exmaples, the ball can go between $$X$$ and $$Z$$ if the node $$Y$$ is shaded and is blocked otherwise. Therefore, the graph on the right will yield $$X \perp Z \mid Y$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* (c), also called the "V-structure", is a special case. Opposite from the first two exmaples, the ball can go between $$X$$ and $$Z$$ if the node $$Y$$ is shaded, and is blocked otherwise. Therefore, the graph on the right yields $$X \perp Z \mid Y$$.
```

> With the basic structures, we can try to apply the rules on a DAG. For example, let us try to find whether $$X_2$$ and $$X_3$$ are independent given $$X_1$$ and $$X_6$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these basic structures, we can apply the rules on a DAG. For example, let us try to find whether $$X_2$$ and $$X_3$$ are independent given $$X_1$$ and $$X_6$$.
```

<figure id="bayes-ball-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col two">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/dag.png' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> After shaded $$X_1$$ and $$X_6$$, we can see that the ball cannot go from $$X_2$$ to $$X_3$$ through $$X_1$$ because it is blocked; however, $$X_2$$, $$X_5$$ and $$X_6$$ forms a "V-structure", so the ball can go between $$X_2$$ and $$X_3$$ through the shaded $$X_6$$. Therefore, the independence statement is invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After shading $$X_1$$ and $$X_6$$, the ball cannot go from $$X_2$$ to $$X_3$$ through $$X_1$$ because it is blocked; however, $$X_2$$, $$X_6$$, and $$X_5$$ forms a "V-structure", so the ball can go along the path $$X_2$$, $$X_6$$, $$X_5$$, $$X_3$$. Therefore, the independence statement is invalid.
```

## Limits of Directed and Undirected GMs

From a representational perspective, we aim to find a graph $$\mathcal{G}$$ that precisely captures the independencies in a given distribution $$P$$. This goal of learning GMs motivates the following definition.

> ### Definition: Perfect Maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perfect Maps
```

> We say that a graph $$\mathcal{G}$$ is a perfect map (P-map) for a set of independencies $$\mathcal{I}$$ if we have that $$\mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G}) = \mathcal{I}$$. We say that $$\mathcal{G}$$ is a perfect map for $$P$$ if $$\mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G}) = \mathcal{I}(P)$$. That is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We say that a graph $$\mathcal{G}$$ is a **perfect map (P-map)** for a set of independencies $$\mathcal{I}$$ if $$\mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G}) = \mathcal{I}$$. We say that $$\mathcal{G}$$ is a perfect map for $$P$$ if $$\mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G}) = \mathcal{I}(P)$$. That is,
```

$$
\text{sep}_{\mathcal{G}}(X;Z \vert Y) \iff P \models (X \perp Z \vert Y)

> $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$.
```

* The P-map of a distribution is unique up to I-equivalence between networks. That is, a distribution P can have many P-maps, but all of them are I-equivalent.

Arbitrary distribution $$P$$'s, however, do not necessarily attain perfect maps as either undirected or directed GMs. Two such examples are shown below. 
<figure id="graph-separation" class="l-body">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/graph_venn.png' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    <strong>A Venn diagram illustration of graphical model families, where D is the family of directed GMs, and U the family of undirected GMs.</strong>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="graph-separation" class="l-body">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/graph_counterexamples.png' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>

>     <strong>Left: a distribution with no possible DGM representation; right: a distribution with no UGM representation</strong>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <strong>**Left**: A distribution with no possible DGM representation, which entails $$A\perp C\vert \{B,D\}$$ and $$B\perp D\vert \{A,C\}$$. **Right**: The v-structure is a distribution with no UGM representation.</strong>
```

  </figcaption>
</figure>

> The left example entails $$A\perp C\vert \{B,D\}$$ and $$B\perp D\vert \{A,C\}$$, and the right is a v-structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Quantitative Specification
### Cliques
* Cliques are subgraphs that are fully connected.
* A maximal clique is a clique such that any superset (any bigger subgraph that contains this subgraph) is not a complete graph.
* A sub-clique is a not-necessarily-maximal clique.
#### Example
<figure id="clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/clique_example.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>
<figure id="clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col two">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/clique_example_max_clique.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>
<figure id="clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col two">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/clique_example_sub_clique.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

### Potential Functions

> Each clique can be associated with a potential function. The potential function can be understood as a provisional function of its arguments by assigning a pre-probabilistic score of their joint distribution. This potential function can be somewhat arbitrary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each clique can be associated with a **potential function** $$\psi$$, which can be understood as a provisional function of its arguments that assigns a pre-probabilistic score of their joint distribution. This potential function can be somewhat arbitrary, but must be non-negative.
```

Why cliques? Each component of the clique contributes to the overall potential function.
#### Example
<figure id="potential-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/potential_func_example.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
    <figcaption>
    <strong>An example used to illustrate potential functions. Both X1 and X2 are binary.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>

> For $$\psi_c(X_1, X_2)$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For $$\psi_c(X_1, X_2)$$,
```

<figure id="potential-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/potential_func_table.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
    <figcaption>
    <strong>This table represents the potential function values given combinations of random variable inputs.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>

> In general, potential functions have to be positive non-zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Potential functions are not necessarily probabilistic:
<figure id="potential-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/potential_func_illustration.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
    <figcaption>
    <strong>Another example used to illustrate potential functions.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>

> This model implies that $$X \perp Y | Z$$ So this graph factorizes as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model implies that $$X \perp Z | Y$$. This independence statement implies (by definition) that the joint must factorize as:
```

<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
    p(x,y,z)&=p(y)p(x|y)p(z|y) \\
    &=p(x,y)p(z|y) \\
    &=p(x|y)p(y,z)
\end{aligned}
</d-math>

> Probability distributions could be used as potential functions. However, in this case, we cannot let all potentials be either marginal probabilities or conditional probabilities. So the potential function for this graph cannot be probability distributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probability distributions can be used as potential functions. However, in this case, we cannot let all potentials be either marginal probabilities or conditional probabilities. So the potential function for this graph cannot be probability distributions.
```

### Gibbs Distribution

> Definition: an undirected graphical model represents a distribution $$P(X_1, ..., X_n)$$ defined by an undirected graph $$H$$, and a set of positive potential functions $$\psi_C$$ associated with cliques of $$H$$, such that

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence; can you reword/clarify? (Gibbs distribution is defined in lecture 3, slide 23 if that helps)

Z=\sum_{x_1,...,x_n}\prod_{c\in C}{\psi_c(\bold{x_c})}
\end{aligned}
</d-math>
$$Z$$ is also known as the partition function. Upper case $$C$$ is the set of all cliques. Lower case $$c$$ is a clique associated with a set of random variables $$\bold{x}$$.

### Example UGM Models <d-footnote>Depending on the question of interest, different representations may be more appropriate.</d-footnote>
<figure id="UGM-clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/UGM_clique_example.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
  <figcaption>
    <strong>An example graph used to illustrate UGM.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>
#### Using Max Cliques
<figure id="UGM-clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/UGM_clique_example_max_clique.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>
<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
  P'(A,B,C,D)=\frac{1}{Z}\psi_c(A,B,D)\psi_c(B,C,D) \\
  Z=\sum_{A,B,C,D}\psi_c(A,B,D)\psi_c(B,C,D)
\end{aligned}
</d-math>

> For discrete nodes, we only need to represent it by two 3D tables instead of one 4D table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only need to represent discrete nodes with two 3D tables instead of one 4D table.
```

#### Using Pairwise Cliques
<figure id="UGM-clique-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/UGM_clique_example_sub_clique.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>
<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
  P''(A,B,C,D)=\frac{1}{Z}\psi_c(A,B)\psi_c(A,D)\psi_c(B,C)\psi_c(B,D)\psi_c(C,D) \\
  Z=\sum_{A,B,C,D}\psi_c(A,B)\psi_c(A,D)\psi_c(B,C)\psi_c(B,D)\psi_c(C,D)
\end{aligned}
</d-math>

> For discrete nodes, we only need to represent it by five 2D tables instead of one 4D table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only need to represent discrete nodes with five 2D tables instead of one 4D table.
```

#### Using Canonical Representation

> Even if we use fine-grained representation, the Mrkov network is often overparameterized. For any given distribution, there are multiple choices of parameters to describe in the model. Consider a pair of cliques $$\{A, B\}$$ and $$\{B, C\}$$, the information about $$B$$ can be placed in either of the two cliques, resulting in ambiguities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if we use fine-grained representation, the Markov network is often overparameterized. For any given distribution, there are multiple choices of parameters to describe in the model. For example, given a pair of cliques $$\{A, B\}$$ and $$\{B, C\}$$, the information about $$B$$ can be placed in either of the two cliques, resulting in ambiguities.
```

> Even if we use fine-grained representation, the Mrkov network is often overparameterized. For any given distribution, there are multiple choices of parameters to describe in the model. Consider a pair of cliques $$\{A, B\}$$ and $$\{B, C\}$$, the information about $$B$$ can be placed in either of the two cliques, resulting in ambiguities.

Reviewer: > "For any given distribution, there are multiple choices of parameters to describe in the model."

This sentence doesn't make sense to me. Can you reword/clarify?

The canonical representation provides a natural approach to avoid this problem. It is defined over all non-empty cliques as shown below.<d-footnote>Please refer to Koller and Friedman Texbook Ch.4, page 129 for details.</d-footnote> The formula performs an inclusion-exclusion computation to make sure that each random variable contributes exactly once to the overall function.
<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
    P'''(A,B,C,D)&=\frac{1}{Z}\psi_c(A,B,D)\psi_c(B,C,D) \\
    & \times\psi_c(A,B)\psi_c(A,D)\psi_c(B,C)\psi_c(B,D)\psi_c(C,D) \\
    & \times\psi_c(A)\psi_c(B)\psi_c(C)\psi_c(D)
\end{aligned}
</d-math>
<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
    Z&=\sum_{A,B,C,D}\psi_c(A,B,D)\psi_c(B,C,D) \\
    & \times\psi_c(A,B)\psi_c(A,D)\psi_c(B,C)\psi_c(B,D)\psi_c(C,D) \\
    & \times\psi_c(A)\psi_c(B)\psi_c(C)\psi_c(D)
\end{aligned}
</d-math> 

## Qualitative Specification
### Global Markov Independency

> Given the following UGM, denoted by $$H$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we are given the following UGM, denoted by $$H$$:
```

<figure id="global-markov-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/global_markov_independence.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> Y separates X and Z if every path from a node in X to a node in Z passes through a node in Y.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$Y$$ separates $$X$$ and $$Z$$ if every path from a node in $$X$$ to a node in $$Z$$ passes through a node in $$Y$$:
```

$$
sep_H(X;Z|Y)
$$

> A probability distribution satisfies the global Markov property if for any disjoint X,Y,Z such that Y separates X and Z, X is independent of Z given Y.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A probability distribution satisfies the **global Markov property** if for any disjoint X,Y,Z such that Y separates X and Z, X is independent of Z given Y.
```
Please change X to math notation $$X$$, etc.

$$
\mathcal{I}(H)=\{X\perp Z | Y:sep_H(X;Z|Y)\}
$$

### Local Markov Independency

> For each node $$X_i\in \bold{V}$$, there is a unique Markov blanket of $$X_i$$, denoted $$MB_{X_i}$$, which is the set of neighbors of $$X_i$$ in the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each node $$X_i\in \bold{V}$$, there is a unique **Markov blanket** of $$X_i$$, denoted $$MB_{X_i}$$, which is the set of neighbors of $$X_i$$ in the graph.
```

> Definition: The local Markov independencies ($$\mathcal{I}_l$$) associated with $$H$$ is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **local Markov independencies** ($$\mathcal{I}_l$$) associated with $$H$$ is:
```

$$
\mathcal{I}_l(H):\{X_i \perp (\bold{V}-\{X_i\}-MB_{X_i})|MB_{X_i}:\forall i\}
$$

In other words, $$X_i$$ is independent of the rest of the nodes given its immediate neighbors $$MB_{X_i}$$.

## Soundness and Completeness of Global Markov Property

The global Markov property for UGMs is similar to its variant for DGMs, in the sense that they both attain similar soundness and completeness results.

### Soundness

> Let $$P$$ be a distribution over $$\mathcal{X}$$, and $$\mathcal{G}$$ a Markov network structure over $$\mathcal{X}$$. If $$P$$ is a Gibbs distribution that factorizes over $$\mathcal{G}$$, then $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Theorem**: Let $$P$$ be a distribution over $$\mathcal{X}$$, and $$\mathcal{G}$$ a Markov network structure over $$\mathcal{X}$$. If $$P$$ is a Gibbs distribution that factorizes over $$\mathcal{G}$$, then $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$.
```

> **Proof**: let $$X,Y,Z$$ be an three disjoint subsets in $$\mathcal{X}$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X$$ and $$Y$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. We will show that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proof**: let $$X,Y,Z$$ be three disjoint subsets in $$\mathcal{X}$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X$$ and $$Y$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. We will show that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$. 
```

First, we observe that there is no direct edge from $$X$$ to $$Y$$. Assuming that $$(X,Y,Z)$$ is a partition of $$\mathcal{X}$$, we know that any clique in $$\mathcal{G}$$ is fully attained in either $$X\cup Z$$ or $$Y\cup Z$$. Let $$\mathcal{I}_{X}$$ be the indices of the set of cliques that are contained in $$X\cup Z$$, and $$\mathcal{I}_{Y}$$ be the set defined for $$Y\cup Z$$. We know that

$$
P(X_1,\cdots,X_n) = \frac{1}{Z}\prod_{i\in \mathcal{I}_X}\phi_i (D_i)\cdot \prod_{i\in \mathcal{I}_Y}\phi_i (D_i).
$$

None of the terms in the first product contains variable from the latter. Hence, we can rewrite this product in the form:

$$
P(X_1,\cdots,X_n) = \frac{1}{Z}f(X,Z)g(Y,Z),
$$

and we observe that independence follows.

> If $$X\cup Y\cup Z$$ is a strict subset of $$\mathcal{X}$$. Let $$U = \mathcal{X}\setminus (X\cup Y\cup Z)$$. We can partition $$U$$ into two disjoint sets $$U_1$$ and $$U_2$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X\cup U_1$$ from $$Y\cup U_2$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. Using our argument from the partition case, we have that $$\big((X\cup U_1)\perp ((Y\cup U_2)\vert Z$$. Apply decomposition property of probability we attain that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If $$X\cup Y\cup Z$$ is a strict subset of $$\mathcal{X}$$. Let $$U = \mathcal{X}\setminus (X\cup Y\cup Z)$$. We can partition $$U$$ into two disjoint sets $$U_1$$ and $$U_2$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X\cup U_1$$ from $$Y\cup U_2$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. Using our argument from the partition case, we have that $$\big((X\cup U_1)\perp ((Y\cup U_2)\vert Z$$. Applying the decomposition property of probability, we have that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$.
```
nit: Add the QED symbol here, e.g. $$\square$$

### Completeness (Hammesley-Clifford theorem)

> Let $$P$$ be a positive distribution over $$\mathcal{X}$$, and $$\mathcal{G}$$ a Markov network graph over $$\mathcal{X}$$. If $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$, then $$P$$ is a Gibbs distribution that factorizes over $$\mathcal{G}$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Theorem**: Let $$P$$ be a positive distribution over $$\mathcal{X}$$, and $$\mathcal{G}$$ a Markov network graph over $$\mathcal{X}$$. If $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$, then $$P$$ is a Gibbs distribution that factorizes over $$\mathcal{G}$$.
```

This result shows that, for positive distributions, the global independencies imply that the distribution factorizes according to the network structure. Thus, for this class of distributions, we have that a distribution $P$ factorizes over a Markov network $$\mathcal{G}$$ if and only if $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$.

## Other Markov Properties

For UGMs, we defined I-maps in terms of global Markov properties. We will now define local independence. Intuitively, when two variables are not directly linked, there must be some way of rendering them conditionally independent. Specifically, we can require that $X$ and $Y$ be independent given all other nodes in the graph.

> ### Definition: Pairwise Independencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pairwise Independencies
```

Let $$\mathcal{G}$$ be a Markov network. We define the pairwise independencies associated with $$\mathcal{G}$$ to be

$$
\mathcal{I}_P(\mathcal{G}) = \{(X\perp Y\vert \mathcal{X}-\{X,Y\}): X-Y\notin \mathcal{G}\}
$$

<figure id="pairwise-indep" class="l-body">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/graph_local_example.png' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    <strong>Example of pairwise independence</strong>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The figure above demonstrates that $$A\perp B\vert \{B,C,D\}$$. 

> Using the definition of pairwise independence and local independence, we attain that

Reviewer: This sentence seems incomplete, did you forget to finish this section?

> ### Proposition

Reviewer: The following 3 propositions and theorem describe the relationship between local and global Markov properties. Please indicate this in the notes, and perhaps unite the 3 propositions + theorem under one section.

For any Markov network $$\mathcal{G}$$ and any distribution $$P$$, we have that if $$P\models \mathcal{I}_l(\mathcal{G})$$  then $$P\models \mathcal{I}_P(\mathcal{G})$$.

### Proposition

For any Markov network $$\mathcal{G}$$ and any distribution $$P$$, we have that if $$P\models \mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G})$$ then $$P\models \mathcal{I}_l(\mathcal{G})$$.

Finally, we reach at the following conclusion

### Proposition

Let $$P$$ be a positive distribution. If $$P$$ satisfies $$\mathcal{I}_P(\mathcal{G})$$, then $$P$$ satisfies $$\mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G})$$.

### Theorem

> The followings are equivalent:

Reviewer: This is only true for positive distributions. Please add "The following statements are equivalent for a positive distribution $$P$$:"

#### $$P\models \mathcal{I}_l(\mathcal{G})$$
#### $$P\models \mathcal{I}_P(\mathcal{G})$$
#### $$P\models \mathcal{I}(\mathcal{G})$$

## Exponential Form

> Since we don't want to constraint the clique potentials to be positive in all situations, exponential form is used to to represent a clique potential $$\phi_c(x_c)$$ in an unconstrained form using a real-value "energy" funtion $$\phi_c(x_c)$$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we don't want to constraint the clique potentials to be positive in all situations, exponential form is used to represent a clique potential $$\phi_c(x_c)$$ in an unconstrained form using a real-value "energy" funtion $$\phi_c(x_c)$$:
```

$$\Phi_c(x_c)=\exp\bigg\{-\phi_c(x_c)\bigg\}$$

> This then gives the joint probability a nice additive structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This then gives the joint probability a nice additive structure:
```

$$p(x)=\frac{1}{Z}\exp\bigg\{-\sum_{c\in C}\phi_c(x_c)\bigg\}=\frac{1}{Z}\exp\bigg\{-H(x)\bigg\}$$

> Where we call the sum in the exponent the "free energy":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the sum in the exponent is called the "free energy":
```

$$H(x) = \sum_{c\in C}\phi_c(x_c)$$

> This form of representation is is called the "Boltzmann distribution" in physics, and called a log-linear model in statstics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This form of representation is called the "Boltzmann distribution" in physics, and a log-linear model in statstics.
```

## Undirected Graph Exmples

> Several well-known undirected graphical models are presented in the class and as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we cover several well-known undirected graphical models: Boltzmann Machine (BM), Ising model, Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM), and Conditional Random Field (CRF).
```

> follows: Boltzmann Machine (BM), Ising model, Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM), and Conditional Random Field (CRF).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Boltzmann Machine (BM)
Boltzmann Machine is a fully connected graph with pairwise (edge) potentials on binary-valued nodes. One example is shown in the following figure:

<figure class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/BM.png' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> The probability distribution could be written as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its probability distribution can be written as:
```

$$p(x_1,x_2,x_3,x_4)=\frac{1}{Z}\exp\bigg\{\sum_{ij}\phi_{ij}(x_i,x_j)\bigg\}$$

> It could be written in a quadratic way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It could also be written in a quadratic way:
```

$$p(x_1,x_2,x_3,x_4)=\frac{1}{Z}\exp\bigg\{\sum_{ij}\theta_{ij}x_ix_j+\sum_i\alpha_ix_i+C\bigg\}$$

> Note that we have a $$C$$ have representing constant in the qudratic form. The over free energy function then has the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence the overall free energy function has the form:
```

$$H(x)=\sum_{ij}(x_i-\mu)\Theta_{ij}(x_j-\mu)=(x-\mu)^T\Theta(x-\mu)$$

which can then be solved using quadratic programming.

### Ising model

> In the Ising model, nodes are arranged in a regular topology (often a regular packing grid) and connected only to their geometric neighbors. It is like a sparse Boltzmann Machine. There are also multi-state Ising model, called Potts Model, in which nodes could take multiple values instead of just binary values. One example of Ising model is shown in the figure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Ising model, nodes are arranged in a regular topology (often a regular packing grid) and connected only to their geometric neighbors. It is like a sparse Boltzmann Machine. There is also the multi-state Ising model (also called Potts model), in which nodes can take multiple values instead of just binary values. One example of Ising model is shown in the following figure:
```

<figure class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/IS.png' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> The probability distribution could be written as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its probability distribution can be written as
```

$$p(X)=\frac{1}{Z}\exp\bigg\{\sum_{i,j\in N_i}\theta_{ij}X_iX_j+\sum_i \theta_{i0}X_i\bigg\}$$

### Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM)

> The graph of a Restricted Bolzmann Machine is bipartite. One could think of at if as formulated by one layer of hidden units and one layer of visibal units. Hidden units are only connected with visible units. Visible units are only connected with hidden units. One example is shown in the figure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Restricted Bolzmann Machine is a bipartite graph with connections between one layer of hidden units and one layer of visible units. One example is shown in the following figure:
```

<figure class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col two">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/RBM.png' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

> The probability distribution could be written as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its probability distribution can be written as
```

$$p(x,h|\theta)=\exp\bigg\{\sum_i\theta_i\phi_i(x_i) + \sum_j\theta_j\phi_j(h_j) + \sum_{i,j}\theta_{i,j}\phi_{i,j}(x_i,h_j)-A(\theta)\bigg\}$$

> RBM has some appealing properties, such as factors are marginally dependent and factors are conditionally independent given observations on the visible nodes. They enable one to use iterative Gibbs sampling for inference and learning on RBM. We have dicussed that if the egdes in RBM are directed, there would be plenty of V-structures in the graph (lots of dependences), that increases the inference difficulty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RBM has some appealing properties. For example, factors are marginally dependent and factors are conditionally independent given observations on the visible nodes. They enable one to use iterative Gibbs sampling for inference and learning on RBM. If the edges in RBM were directed, there would be plenty of V-structures in the graph (lots of dependences) that increase the inference difficulty.
```

### Conditional Random Field (CRF)

> Conditional random field is an analogy form of HMM in undirected case. It allows arbitrary dependencies on input. For example, when labeling $$X_i$$, future observations are taken into account. An example of CRF is shown in the figure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conditional random field is an analogous form of HMM in the undirected case. It allows arbitrary dependencies on the input. For example, when labeling $$X_i$$, future observations can be taken into account. An example of CRF is shown in the figure:
```

$$
\text{sep}_{\mathcal{G}}(X;Z \vert Y) \iff P \models (X \perp Z \vert Y)
$$.

* The P-map of a distribution is unique up to I-equivalence between networks. That is, a distribution P can have many P-maps, but all of them are I-equivalent.

Arbitrary distribution $$P$$'s, however, do not necessarily attain perfect maps as either undirected or directed GMs. Two such examples are shown below. 
<figure id="graph-separation" class="l-body">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/graph_venn.png' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    <strong>A Venn diagram illustration of graphical model families, where D is the family of directed GMs, and U the family of undirected GMs.</strong>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="graph-separation" class="l-body">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/graph_counterexamples.png' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>

>     <strong>**Left**: A distribution with no possible DGM representation, which entails $$A\perp C\vert \{B,D\}$$ and $$B\perp D\vert \{A,C\}$$. **Right**: The v-structure is a distribution with no UGM representation.</strong>

Reviewer: Sorry, it seems the **bold** and $$math$$ formatting don't work here. Maybe you can just put the text outside, like this?
`
```suggestion
 **Left**: A distribution with no possible DGM representation, which entails $$A\perp C\vert \{B,D\}$$ and $$B\perp D\vert \{A,C\}$$. **Right**: The v-structure is a distribution with no UGM representation.
```

Reviewer: Can you make the suggested change? Otherwise the **bold** and $$math$$ formatting doesn't work:
![screen shot 2019-01-31 at 9 45 01 pm](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2617555/52099507-8d2cda00-25a1-11e9-8f5d-bda8c31f2c4f.png)

        </div>
    </div>
    <figcaption>
    <strong>This table represents the potential function values given combinations of random variable inputs.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Potential functions are not necessarily probabilistic:
<figure id="potential-example" class="l-body">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col one">
            <img src="{{ 'assets/img/notes/lecture-03/potential_func_illustration.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
        </div>
    </div>
    <figcaption>
    <strong>Another example used to illustrate potential functions.</strong>
    </figcaption>
</figure>
This model implies that $$X \perp Z | Y$$. This independence statement implies (by definition) that the joint must factorize as:
<d-math block>
\begin{aligned}
    p(x,y,z)&=p(y)p(x|y)p(z|y) \\
    &=p(x,y)p(z|y) \\
    &=p(x|y)p(y,z)
\end{aligned}
</d-math>
Probability distributions can be used as potential functions. However, in this case, we cannot let all potentials be either marginal probabilities or conditional probabilities. So the potential function for this graph cannot be probability distributions.

### Gibbs Distribution and Undirected Graphical Model Definition

> Definition: Given an undirected graph $$H$$ and clique potentials functions $$\psi_C$$ associated with cliques of $$H$$, we say $$P(X_1, ..., X_n)$$ is a **Gibbs distribution** over $$H$$ if it can be represented as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given an undirected graph $$H$$ and clique potentials functions $$\psi_C$$ associated with cliques of $$H$$, we say $$P(X_1, ..., X_n)$$ is a **Gibbs distribution** over $$H$$ if it can be represented as
```

$$
P(X_1, ..., X_n)=\frac{1}{Z}\prod_{c\in C}{\psi_c(\bold{x_c})}
$$

> Where $$Z$$ is also known as the partition function. Upper case $$C$$ is the set of all cliques. Lower case $$c$$ is a clique associated with a set of random variables $$\bold{x}$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $$Z$$ is also known as the partition function. Upper case $$C$$ denotes the set of all cliques, and lower case $$c$$ denotes a clique associated with a set of random variables $$\bold{x}$$.
```

> Definition: an **undirected graphical model** represents a distribution $$P(X_1, ..., X_n)$$ defined by an undirected graph $$H$$, a set of positive potential functions $$\psi_C$$ and the associated cliques of $$H$$, such that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **undirected graphical model** represents a distribution $$P(X_1, ..., X_n)$$ defined by an undirected graph $$H$$, a set of positive potential functions $$\psi_C$$ and the associated cliques of $$H$$, such that
```

$$
sep_H(X;Z|Y)
$$

A probability distribution satisfies the **global Markov property** if for any disjoint X,Y,Z such that Y separates X and Z, X is independent of Z given Y.

$$
\mathcal{I}(H)=\{X\perp Z | Y:sep_H(X;Z|Y)\}
$$

### Local Markov Independency
For each node $$X_i\in \bold{V}$$, there is a unique **Markov blanket** of $$X_i$$, denoted $$MB_{X_i}$$, which is the set of neighbors of $$X_i$$ in the graph.

The **local Markov independencies** ($$\mathcal{I}_l$$) associated with $$H$$ is:

$$
\mathcal{I}_l(H):\{X_i \perp (\bold{V}-\{X_i\}-MB_{X_i})|MB_{X_i}:\forall i\}
$$

In other words, $$X_i$$ is independent of the rest of the nodes given its immediate neighbors $$MB_{X_i}$$.

## Soundness and Completeness of Global Markov Property

The global Markov property for UGMs is similar to its variant for DGMs, in the sense that they both attain similar soundness and completeness results.

### Soundness

**Theorem**: Let $$P$$ be a distribution over $$\mathcal{X}$$, and $$\mathcal{G}$$ a Markov network structure over $$\mathcal{X}$$. If $$P$$ is a Gibbs distribution that factorizes over $$\mathcal{G}$$, then $$\mathcal{G}$$ is an I-map for $$P$$.

> **Proof**: let $$X,Y,Z$$ be three disjoint subsets in $$\mathcal{X}$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X$$ and $$Y$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. We will show that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proof**: Let $$X,Y,Z$$ be three disjoint subsets in $$\mathcal{X}$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X$$ and $$Y$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. We will show that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$. 
```

First, we observe that there is no direct edge from $$X$$ to $$Y$$. Assuming that $$(X,Y,Z)$$ is a partition of $$\mathcal{X}$$, we know that any clique in $$\mathcal{G}$$ is fully attained in either $$X\cup Z$$ or $$Y\cup Z$$. Let $$\mathcal{I}_{X}$$ be the indices of the set of cliques that are contained in $$X\cup Z$$, and $$\mathcal{I}_{Y}$$ be the set defined for $$Y\cup Z$$. We know that

$$
P(X_1,\cdots,X_n) = \frac{1}{Z}\prod_{i\in \mathcal{I}_X}\phi_i (D_i)\cdot \prod_{i\in \mathcal{I}_Y}\phi_i (D_i).
$$

None of the terms in the first product contains variable from the latter. Hence, we can rewrite this product in the form:

$$
P(X_1,\cdots,X_n) = \frac{1}{Z}f(X,Z)g(Y,Z),
$$

and we observe that independence follows.

> If $$X\cup Y\cup Z$$ is a strict subset of $$\mathcal{X}$$. Let $$U = \mathcal{X}\setminus (X\cup Y\cup Z)$$. We can partition $$U$$ into two disjoint sets $$U_1$$ and $$U_2$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X\cup U_1$$ from $$Y\cup U_2$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. Using our argument from the partition case, we have that $$\big((X\cup U_1)\perp ((Y\cup U_2)\vert Z$$. Apply decomposition property of probability we attain that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$ $$\square$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If $$X\cup Y\cup Z$$ is a strict subset of $$\mathcal{X}$$. Let $$U = \mathcal{X}\setminus (X\cup Y\cup Z)$$. We can partition $$U$$ into two disjoint sets $$U_1$$ and $$U_2$$ such that $$Z$$ separates $$X\cup U_1$$ from $$Y\cup U_2$$ in $$\mathcal{G}$$. Using our argument from the partition case, we have that $$\big((X\cup U_1)\perp ((Y\cup U_2)\vert Z$$. Apply decomposition property of probability we attain that $$P\models (X\perp Y\vert Z)$$. $$\square$$
```
